feat: rework OAuth2 webhook docs (#1712)
ory/docs: docs/hydra/guides/oauth2-webhooks.mdx

---
id: claims-at-refresh

> title: OAuth2 webhooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Customize claims with OAuth2 webhooks 
```

moved the h1 from below here.

sidebar_label: OAuth2 webhooks
keywords:
  - webhooks
  - custom
  - customize
  - claims
  - jwt
  - access
  - token
---

> # Customizing claims with OAuth2 webhooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

AFAIK we dont need h1, its taken from the title

```mdx-code-block
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem'
```

You can modify aspects of the OpenID Connect and access tokens returned from Hydra's OAuth2 token endpoint. A typical use case is

> adding custom claims to the tokens issued by Hydra.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adding custom claims to the tokens issued by Ory OAuth2/Ory Hydra.
```

lets be explicit once in the beginning and then use Ory in the rest? 
IMO this document needs to work for both Ory Network users as well as self-hosted. 
I do have some ideas how to improve this in the near future.

> To customize the token response, you must configure a webhook endpoint in your OAuth2 configuration. Before the token is issued to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To customize the token response configure a webhook endpoint in your OAuth2 configuration. Before the token is issued to
```

Author: This sentence is now definitely missing a comma :D

Author: rephrased

> the client, Hydra will call your HTTPS endpoint with information about the OAuth client requesting the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the client, Ory will call your HTTPS endpoint with information about the OAuth client requesting the token.
```

see above

> For the Authorization Code flow, information about the resource owner's session are also included in the webhook payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing an Authorization Code flow information about the resource owner's session is also included in the webhook payload.
```

> Your endpoint's response to the webhook will be used to customize the token that Hydra issues to the OAuth client, and optionally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your endpoint's response to the webhook will be used to customize the token that Ory issues to the OAuth client, and optionally
```

see above

overwrite the session data stored for the resource owner.

> Using webhooks is supported for all grant types (flows).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using webhooks is supported for all grant types (flows).
```

which one is it? probably good to be exact here, easy to get confused with OAuth2 terminology IMO.

Author: I've regarded flow and grant type as synonymous.

Reviewer: Gotcha. Maybe not super relevant for this PR but IMO we should pick one and stick with it in the documentation in general? 

It can be confusing if we sometimes talk about flows and in other places talk about grant types while meaning the same thing.

Author: Yes, I agree. Calling that out of scope for this PR tho.

`ory patch oauth2-config $project_id \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/url="https://my-example.app/token-hook"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/type="api_key"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/config/in="header"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/config/name="X-API-Key"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/config/value="MY API KEY"' \\
  --format yaml`}
    </CodeBlock>
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="cookie-auth" label="with authentication in cookie">
    <CodeBlock language="shell">{
`ory patch oauth2-config $project_id \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/url="https://my-example.app/token-hook"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/type="api_key"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/config/in="cookie"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/config/name="X-Cookie-Name"' \\
  --add '/oauth2/token_hook/auth/config/value="MY SECRET COOKIE"' \\
  --format yaml`}
    </CodeBlock>
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="no-auth" label="no authentication">
    <CodeBlock language="shell">{
`ory patch oauth2-config $project_id \\
--add '/oauth2/token_hook="https://my-example.app/token-hook"' \\
--format yaml`}
    </CodeBlock>
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

## Webhook payload

> Ory Hydra will perform a POST request with a JSON payload towards your endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ory will perform a POST request with a JSON payload towards your endpoint.
```

see above

```json title="Example OAuth2 token webhook request payload"
{
  "session": {
    "id_token": {
      "id_token_claims": {
        "jti": "",
        "iss": "http://your-slug-xyz.projects.oryapis.com",
        "sub": "subject",
        "aud": ["app-client"],
        "nonce": "",
        "at_hash": "",
        "acr": "1",
        "amr": null,
        "c_hash": "",
        "ext": {}
      },
      "headers": {
        "extra": {}
      },
      "username": "",
      "subject": "foo"
    },
    "extra": {},
    "client_id": "app-client",
    "consent_challenge": "",
    "exclude_not_before_claim": false,
    "allowed_top_level_claims": []
  },
  "request": {
    "client_id": "app-client",
    "granted_scopes": ["offline", "openid", "hydra.*"],
    "granted_audience": [],
    "grant_types": ["authorization_code"],
    "payload": {
      "assertion": ["eyJhbGciOiJIUzI..."]
    }
  }
}
```

> `session` represents the OAuth session, along with the data that was passed to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`session` represents the OAuth2 session, along with the data that was passed to the
```

[Accept Consent Request](https://www.ory.sh/docs/hydra/reference/api#operation/acceptConsentRequest) in the `id_token` field (only
applicable to Authorization code flows).

> `request` contains information from the OAuth client's request to the token endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`request` contains information from the OAuth2 client request to the token endpoint.
```

Author: IMO the original version is more clear.

The `request.payload.assertion` field will be populated for flows of the
[`urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer`](jwt.mdx#using-jwts-as-authorization-grants) grant type only, and contains the JWT
the client passed as the `assertion` in their call to the token endpoint.

## Responding to the webhook

> When handling the webhook in your endpoint, use the request payload to decide how Hydra should proceed in the token exchange with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When handling the webhook in your endpoint, use the request payload to decide how Ory should proceed in the token exchange with
```

the client.

To accept the token exchange without modification, return a `204` or `200` HTTP status code without a response body.

To deny the token exchange, reply with a `403` HTTP status code.

To modify the claims of the issued tokens and instruct Hydra to proceed with the token exchange, return `200` with a JSON response
body:

```json
{
  "session": {
    "access_token": {
      "your:custom:access-token-claim": "any value you like",
      "your:second:access-token-claim": 124390123
    },
    "id_token": {
      "your:custom:id-token-claim": "another value",
      "your:second:id-token-claim": 2394123
    }
  }
}
```

> Responding with any other HTTP status code will abort the token exchange toward the OAuth client with an error message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Responding with any other HTTP status code will abort the token exchange toward the OAuth2 client with an error message.
```

## Updated tokens

> Tokens issued by Hydra to the OAuth client will contain the data from your webhook response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tokens issued by Ory to the OAuth2 client will contain the data from your webhook response:
```

{
  "active": true,
  "scope": "openid offline",
  "client_id": "my_client",
  "sub": "foo@bar.com",
  "aud": [],
  "iss": "http://ory.hydra.example/",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "token_use": "access_token",
  "ext": {
      "your:custom:access-token-claim": "any value you like",
      "your:second:access-token-claim": 124390123,
    }
}
     `}</CodeBlock>
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

:::note

You cannot override the token subject.

:::

### Refresh token

If a webhook for `refresh_token` grant type fails with a non-graceful result, the refresh flow will fail and the supplied
`refresh_token` will remain unused.

## Legacy webhook implementation (deprecated)

:::warning

This mechanism is deprecated and no longer supported

:::

There is an old version of the webhook feature built specifically for the `refresh_token` grant type. We recommend using the
generic webhook feature because the old one will soon be deprecated.

Use the Ory CLI with following keys to enable this feature:

```shell title="Enable the refresh token hook"
ory patch oauth2-config {project.id} \
  --add '/oauth2/refresh_token_hook/url="https://my-example.app/token-refresh-hook"' \
  --format yaml
```

> ### Webhook payload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Legacy webhook payload
```

Very clear headlines help our GPT bot to make sense of it (humans too probably)
